oh there we go that is what we are
expecting from the British prime
minister and as I say we will be joined
by all our viewers around the world and
indeed on BBC one for this televised
address it is now almost two months
since the people of this country began
to put up with restrictions on their
freedom your freedom of a kind that we
have never seen before in peace or war
and you have shown that good sense to
support those rules overwhelmingly
you've put up with all the hardships of
that program of social distancing
because you understand that as things
that and as the experience of every
other country has shown it's the only
way to defeat the coronavirus the most
vicious threat this country has faced in
my lifetime and though the death toll
has been tragic and the suffering
immense and though we grieve for all
those we have lost it is a fact that by
adopting those measures we prevented
this country from being engulfed by what
could have been a catastrophe in which
the reasonable worst-case scenario was
half a million fatalities and it's
thanks to your effort and sacrifice in
stopping the spread of this disease that
the death rate is coming down and
hospital admissions are coming down and
thanks to you we've protected our NHS
and saved many thousands of lives and so
I know you know that it would be madness
now to throw away that achievement by
allowing a second spike we must stay
alert we must continue to control the
virus and save lives and yet we must
also recognize that this campaign
against the virus has come at colossal
cost to our way of life we can see it
all around us in these shuttered shops
and abandoned businesses and darkened
pubs and restaurants and there are
millions of people who are both fearful
of this terrible disease and at the same
time also fearful of what this long
period of enforced inactivity
will do to their livelihoods and their
mental and physical well-being to their
futures and the futures of their
children so I want to provide tonight
for you the shape of a plan to address
both fears both to beat the virus and
provide the first sketch of a roadmap
for reopening society a sense of the way
ahead and when and how and on what basis
we will take the decisions to proceed
I'll be sending out more details in
Parliament tomorrow and taking questions
from the public in the evening I've
consulted across the political spectrum
across all four nations of the UK and
though different parts of the country
are experiencing the pandemic at
different rates and though it's right to
be flexible in our response I believe
that as Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom Scotland England Wales Northern
Ireland there is a strong resolve to
defeat this together
and today a general consensus on what we
could do and I stress could because
although we have a plan it is a
conditional plan and since our priority
is to protect the public and save lives
we cannot move forward unless we satisfy
the five tests we must protect our NHS
we must see sustained falls in the death
threat we must see sustained and
considerable falls in the rate of
infection we must sort out our
challenges in getting enough PPE to the
people who need it
and yes it's a global problem but we
must fix it and last we must make sure
that any measures we take do not force
the reproduction rate of the disease the
are back up over one so that we have the
kind of exponential growth we were
facing a few weeks
and to chart our progress and to avoid
going back to square one we're
establishing a new co vide alert system
run by a new joint biosecurity Center
and that co vid alert level will be
determined primarily by our and the
number of coronavirus cases and in turn
that kobe the alert level will tell us
how tough we have to be in our social
distancing measures the lower the level
the few of the measures the higher the
level the tougher and stricter we will
have to be there will be five alert
levels level one means the disease is no
longer present in the UK and level five
is the most critical the kind of
situation we could have had if the NHS
had been overwhelmed over the period of
the lockdown we've been in level four
and it's thanks to your sacrifice were
now in a position to begin to move in
steps to level three and as we go
everyone will have a role to play in
keeping the order by staying alert and
following the rules and to keep pushing
the number of infections done there are
two more things we must do we must
reverse rapidly the awful epidemics in
care homes and in the NHS and though the
numbers are coming down sharply now
there is plainly much more to be done
and if were to control this virus then
we must have a world-beating system the
testing potential victims and for
tracing their contacts so that all told
we're testing literally hundreds of
thousands of people every day we've made
fast progress on testing but there is so
much more to do now and we can when this
began we hadn't seen this disease before
and we didn't fully understand its
effects with every day we're getting
more
more data we're shining the light of
science on this invisible killer and we
will pick it up where it strikes because
our new system will be able in time to
detect local flare-ups in your area as
well as giving us a national picture and
yet when I look at where we are tonight
we have the are below 1 between 0.5 and
point 9 but potentially only just below
1 and though we have made progress in
satisfying at least some of the
conditions I have given we have by no
means fulfilled all of them and so no
this is not the time simply to end the
lockdown this week instead we're taking
the first careful steps to modify our
measures and the first step is a change
of emphasis that we hope that people
will act on this week we said that you
should work from home if you can and
only go to work if you must
we now need to stress that anyone who
can't work from home for instance those
in construction or manufacturing should
be actively encouraged to go to work and
we want it to be safe for you to get to
work so you should avoid public
transport if at all possible because we
must and will maintain social distancing
and capacity will therefore be limited
so work from home if you can but you
should go to work if you can't work from
home and to ensure you're safe at work
we've been working to establish new
guidance for employers to make
workplaces couvade secure and when you
do go to work if possible do so by car
or even better by walking or bicycle but
just as with workplaces public transport
operators will also be following coded
secure standards and from this Wednesday
we want to encourage people to take more
and even unlimited
outdoor exercise you can sit in the Sun
in your local park you can drive to
other destinations you can even play
sports
only with members of your own hassle you
must obey the rules on social distancing
and to enforce those rules we will
increase the fines for the small
minority who break them and so every day
with ever-increasing data we will be
monitoring the our and the number of new
infections and the progress we are
making and if we in step 2 are the
earliest by June the 1st after half turn
we believe we may be in a position to
begin the phased reopening of shops and
to get primary pupils back into schools
in stages beginning with reception year
1 and year 6 our ambition is that
secondary pupils facing exams next year
will get at least some time with their
teachers before the holidays more
shortly be setting out detailed guidance
on how to make it work in schools and
shops and on transport and step 3 are
the earliest by July and subject to all
these conditions and further scientific
advice if and only if the numbers
supported we will hope to reopen at
least some of the hospitality industry
and other public places provided they're
safe and enforce social distancing
throughout this period of the next two
months we will be driven not by mere
hope or economic necessity we're going
to be driven by the science the data and
public health and I must stress again
that all of this is conditional it all
depends on a series of big IFS it
depends on all of us the entire country
to follow the advice to observe social
distancing and to keep that are down and
to prevent reinfection from abroad I am
serving notice that it will soon be the
time with transmission significant
lower to impose quarantine on people
coming into this country by air and it's
because of your efforts to get the are
down and the number of infections down
here that this measure will now be
effective and of course we will be
monitoring our progress locally
regionally and nationally and if there
are outbreaks if there are problems we
will not hesitate to put on the brakes
we've been through the initial peak but
it's coming down the mountain that is
often more dangerous we have a route and
we have a plan and everyone in
government has the all-consuming
pressure and challenge to save lives
restore livelihoods and gradually
restore the freedoms that we need but in
the end this is a plan that everyone
must make work and when I look at what
you've done already the patience and
common sense you've shown the fortitude
of the elderly whose isolation we all
want to end as fast as we can
the incredible bravery and hard work of
our NHS staff our care workers the
devotion and self-sacrifice of all those
in every walk of life who are helping us
to beat this disease police bus drivers
train drivers pharmacists Supermarket
workers Road hauliers bin collectors
cleaners security guards postal workers
our teachers and a thousand more the
scientists who are working around the
clock to find a vaccine when I think of
the millions of everyday acts of
kindness and thoughtfulness that are
being performed across this country and
that have helped to get us through this
first phase I know that we can use this
plan to get us through the next and if
we can't do it by those dates and if the
alert level won't allow it we will
simply wait and go on until we've got it
right we will come back from this
devilish illness we will come back to
health and robust health and there the
UK will be changed by this experience I
believe we can be stronger and better
never before more resilient more
innovative more economically dynamic but
also more generous and more sharing but
for now we must stay alert control the
virus and save lives thank you very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder
UK forward slash news follow the story
for all the latest with BBC News